What is agentic AI?
While there are many different definitions that have been proposed 
for what constitutes an agentic AI system,1 for the purposes of this 
paper, we define agentic AI as a system with multi-step planning and 
reasoning capabilities that can autonomously query and select tools 
within boundaries set by the user to execute on a user-defined task 
or achieve an outcome. 
Autonomy in this context does not mean that all agentic AI systems 
operate with the same level of independence. Autonomy exists 
on a spectrum, and in many instances, users can set the level of 
autonomy of the agentic AI system within a given tool or product via 
design patterns. The risk level of a particular agentic AI system varies 
depending on the level of autonomy, the environment in which an 
agentic AI system is deployed, the complexity of the goal or outcome 
the agentic AI system is intending to achieve, and its ability to impact 
the environment in which it operates.

This is especially important in a policy context, where the risk level 
matters in determining proportionate obligations. We discuss this 
further in our Policy Considerations section. Importantly, even with 
increased autonomy, there remains a significant element of human 
involvement, particularly in assigning tasks to the agentic AI system, 
defining the parameters in which the system operates, setting the 
guardrails, and overseeing the execution of those tasks.
Agentic AI systems are typically built upon general-purpose 
large language models (LLMs), which provide essential reasoning 
capabilities. While many agentic AI systems rely upon general
purpose LLMs given their powerful reasoning capabilities, not all of 
them follow this approach. Some agentic AI systems are constructed 
using LLMs that have been fine-tuned on domain-specific data for a 
certain task. For example:
In the biomedical space, models like BioGPT, PubMedBERT, and 
Med-PALM have been trained on a specific subset of data (e.g. medical 
databases) to support a targeted use case, like autonomously cross
referencing patient data with the latest clinical studies to assist a doctor 
in identifying potential diagnoses. An agentic AI system could be built 
on top of one of these specialized models.  
When it comes to serving small business’ financial needs, an agentic 
AI system could be built upon a model specifically trained on financial 
regulations and small business financial data. This specialized model, 
akin to a "FinServ-LLM," could autonomously analyze a small business’ 
financial statements, cross-reference them with public databases for 
relevant economic indicators and business registries to reduce manual 
data entry, and then generate tailored recommendations for identifying 
eligible government grants and loans. The agentic AI system would then 
take the initiative to draft necessary application forms or compliance 
reports. This would shift the burden of financial administration away 
from the entrepreneur, allowing them to focus on growth while the AI 
secures opportunities. 
Besides LLMs, some agentic AI systems can operate on small 
language models (SLMs) that are optimized for targeted, domain
specific tasks.3 While LLMs are best suited to handle broad  
reasoning and complex agent orchestration, SLMs excel at the 
focused, repetitive tasks performed by specialized AI agents.

What goes into an agentic AI system? Who is  
directly involved in the agentic AI value chain?
An agentic AI system typically comprises several components:
Data: The effectiveness and accuracy of AI systems are heavily 
dependent on the quality, representativeness, and reliability of the 
data they are trained on. Through data, AI systems learn language, 
recognize patterns, and make predictions. Data sources vary and can 
include the open web, enterprise and proprietary databases, scientific 
datasets, public records, and artificially generated synthetic data.
LLM or SLM: LLMs or SLMs are an agentic AI system’s decision-making 
engine. They provide reasoning capabilities for the agentic AI system 
and are the basis upon which the agentic AI system analyzes the 
situation presented to it and plans the steps it should take. They can 
also delegate tasks to be executed on by the agentic AI system’s tools.
As noted above, the LLM could be based upon a general-purpose LLM,  
or it could be based upon a domain-specific LLM.
System architecture: This is, effectively, the structure that enables 
the LLM or SLM to act as an agent. It is used for the orchestration and 
execution of the tasks and tools that constitute the agentic workflow. 
In particular, the system architecture imbues the LLM or SLM with 
memory and provides it with the ability to pursue goals, break them 
into steps, and use tools.
Tools: An agentic AI system has access to specific tools to gather 
information and execute actions. Depending on the agentic AI system, 
it might have access to tools like web navigation, file operation, 
running LLM-written code, querying and updating data, email 
handling, or keyboard or mouse control. Tools are accessed by agentic 
AI systems through standardized APIs.
Importantly, underpinning any AI system is an eco-system of upstream and downstream 
infrastructure and technologies—known as the AI technology stack—that makes AI development 
and deployment possible.4 This same foundational stack underpins agentic AI systems.

Associated with these components of the agentic AI systems are actors: 
Data curator: This is the organization that curates, manages, or maintains the data used 
to train, fine-tune, or operate AI models and agentic AI systems. A data curator may be 
responsible for selecting, collecting, labeling, cleaning, and updating data to ensure it is 
accurate, representative, and compliant with applicable laws and licensing terms. In some 
cases, the data curator is the original creator of the data. In others, it could be a third party 
that licenses or aggregates datasets from multiple sources.
Developer of the LLM or SLM: This is the organization responsible for developing the LLM 
or SLM that provides the agentic AI system with reasoning capabilities. The base model 
could be a general-purpose or a domain-specific LLM or SLM. Many AI models are also 
adding their own built-in agentic capabilities that support performing web searches to 
support reasoning, etc. In some instances, the developer of the LLM or SLM may also be the 
data owner/curator.
Developer of system architecture: This is the organization that develops system 
architecture for an AI agent. In some instances, the developer of the system architecture  
is the same as the developer of the LLM or SLM, but in other instances, it could be a 
different organization. 
Tool developer: This is the organization or actor that develops the tools that the model 
accesses in order to execute on its tasks. In some instances, tools are not specifically 
designed for an agentic AI system. Companies that develop tools include established LLM 
developers, major software companies, as well as smaller developers that specialize in a 
particular niche. 
Agentic AI system integrator: This is the organization that assembles the model, agentic 
architecture, and tools into a cohesive system, ensuring they work together reliably. 
In some cases, the integrator may also be the deployer, but not always (especially in 
enterprise contexts). 
Deployer of agentic AI system: The ultimate deployer of the system, who makes the  
choice about how to put the system into use. Deployers set the operational parameters  
for the agentic AI system.
Actors responsible for managing and verifying credentials for agentic AI systems:  
Such actors include Identity and Access Management (IAM) platforms that authenticate 
agentic AI systems and authorize their access to data, APIs, and systems.5
It is important to note that these roles are not always distinct. A single organization may  
play multiple roles in the value chain (e.g., developing the LLM or SLM, developing the  
system architecture, and deploying the final agentic AI system).

Benefits of Agentic AI Systems   
Agentic AI systems offer numerous benefits for businesses and 
their customers. Below we highlight just a few examples of agentic 
AI’s transformative potential to boost productivity, streamline work 
processes, and enhance security. 

Transforming Public Sector Governance: 
Agentic AI holds the potential to transform 
key government and public administration 
layers, including service delivery, crisis 
response, compliance, policymaking, and 
procurement.
Enhancing Cybersecurity: As security 
teams race to outpace AI-wielding threat 
actors, agentic AI can save users hours of 
manual work by completing tasks such as 
initial detection triage or prioritization of 
alerts on their behalf.Agentic AI can 
allow Security Operations Center teams 
to focus on the most critical threats and 
perform more advanced tasks, while 
agentic AI handles less complex issues.
Improving Customer Service: Agentic 
AI can streamline customer service by 
automating tasks like customer support, 
dispute resolution, and know-your
customer updates. Such capabilities allow 
24/7 service and help employees focus on 
more complex work.

Empowering Advanced AI Agents and 
Companions Across Consumer Devices: 
Agentic AI enables intelligent, context
aware assistants to operate seamlessly on 
smartphones, PCs, wearables, and vehicles, 
enhancing personalization, productivity, and 
real-time decision-making in everyday life.
Improving Data Analytics: Agentic AI 
systems analyze and synthesize information 
at large scale, identifying patterns and 
delivering insights that inform decision 
making.
Streamlining HR: Agentic AI systems provide 
predictive workforce planning, staffing 
strategies, and can handle FAQs, manage 
time off, payroll, and administer benefits 
such as healthcare, retirement plans, career 
growth opportunities, and more.
Enhancing Finance and Compliance: Agentic 
AI systems can audit financial transactions 
in real time, detecting fraud and updating 
compliance reports. 
Jaggedness: While LLMs that underpin 
agents are trained on encyclopedic volumes 
of data, they can exhibit jagged intelligence. 
Jagged intelligence means being highly 
capable in some areas but struggling 
with simpler tasks that most humans 
find intuitive and can reliably solve.
Understanding these deeper characteristics 
is crucial for designing robust agentic AI 
systems. Because agentic AI systems often 
chain multiple steps together, an error 
in one step based on a “jagged” area of 
incompetence can cascade through the 
entire workflow. Such a jagged failure can 
compound over time, leading to a sequence 
of flawed decisions and resulting in a series 
of failures.

Privacy Implications: If agentic AI systems 
are given unrestricted access to resources, 
databases, or tools without necessary 
guardrails in place, they could potentially 
collect, store, and transmit sensitive 
information about users, interactions, and 
behavior patterns. Such unrestricted 
access and accumulation of data may
create new privacy vulnerabilities unless 
properly addressed. Further, whether the 
information is stored on a device or in cloud 
environments, it could create new attack 
surfaces for surveillance, exfiltration, and 
misuse, and may be legally accessible to 
third parties such as in the case of a court 
order. Privacy-enhancing technologies, like 
differential privacy and trusted execution 
environments, are especially important in 
helping to manage privacy risks in an agentic 
AI system. Other tools, like ethical data 
governance and provenance practices, can 
also play a key role in managing privacy risks.

Security Vulnerabilities: Agentic AI systems, 
like other AI systems, may be vulnerable 
to a wide range of exploits. For instance, 
attackers can perform prompt injection—
feeding malicious instructions to the 
agent—to bypass its safety measures or 
gain unauthorized access. Similarly, an 
agentic AI system’s underlying model could 
be “poisoned” with corrupted data. These 
risks may grow as agentic AI systems are 
integrated with software environments, 
APIs, files, and IoT devices. If compromised, 
an agentic AI system might take harmful 
actions autonomously, with little or no human 
oversight. Malign actors may also exploit 
weaknesses in the models themselves or the 
external tools they rely upon.
Cyber Threat Landscape Implications: 
Agentic AI has the potential to transform 
the entire cyberattack chain by enabling the 
deployment of autonomous, specialized 
agentic AI systems that work in concert. 
These purpose-built agentic AI systems are 
designed to operate independently, test 
various attack methods, execute actions, and 
dynamically adjust tactics based on real
time feedback, forming an intelligent, self
correcting attack system. The emergence 
of agentic AI is an accelerating reality 
that challenges existing threat detection, 
response, and mitigation strategies. The 
rapid pace of AI development means that 
both attackers and defenders are operating 
in a rapidly evolving landscape, where the 
capabilities of security vendors and malicious 
actors are constantly changing.

Malicious Use: Agentic AI systems can be 
misused, such as for large-scale generation 
and dissemination of disinformation, scaling 
up offensive cyber operations, or increasing 
access to expert capabilities in dual-use 
scientific research and development.

Automation Bias: Agentic AI systems have 
the potential to automate repetitive or 
complex tasks. At the same time, users may 
develop excessive trust in these models, a 
phenomenon known as automation bias, 
leading to poor decision-making or loss of 
essential skills. If agentic AI systems become 
general-purpose substitutes for human effort, 
society may face longer-term consequences, 
including cognitive dependency and 
workforce deskilling.
Accountability for Decision-making: In case 
of errors or harmful outcomes caused by 
agentic AI systems, defining accountability may 
become complicated depending on the level 
of autonomy of the system, the complexity 
of the technology stack that may compose an 
agentic AI system, and their dynamic decision
making. Potential failures of agentic AI 
systems can erode trust in businesses and other 
organizations deploying these models. 

Value Misalignment and Unintended Actions: 
Agentic AI systems might pursue goals in 
ways that do not align with the user’s intent 
or human values. Such misalignment could 
happen if instructions given to the agent are 
unclear or if the agent optimizes too narrowly. 
Greater autonomy of agentic AI systems might 
lead to a higher risk of accidents or unethical 
actions caused by this misalignment.

Workplace Shifts: The widespread adoption 
of agentic AI systems might shift labor and 
skill demand in complex ways. These systems 
can automate a wide range of tasks, including 
cognitive and white-collar functions. As a 
general-purpose technology, AI is expected 
to diffuse across many industries, although its 
long-term impact on the job market remains 
uncertain. Further research into trends in AI 
adoption will help governments and industry 
alike to better understand how AI systems, 
including agentic AI, will impact employment 
levels and various occupations.
Agentic AI systems’ capabilities and implications 
are yet to be fully understood. Along with 
opportunities, agentic AI may also pose risks 
related to privacy, security, accountability, and 
lead to broader socio-economic changes. Many 
of these risks are shared with other AI systems, 
but the increased autonomy and interactivity 
of agentic AI systems may exacerbate them. As 
adoption grows, policy frameworks, technical 
solutions to protect data, and robust security 
standards will be essential to ensure the 
responsible development and deployment of 
agentic AI.

Policy Considerations
As governments consider how to encourage secure and trusted 
use of agentic AI, we continue to advocate for policies that are 
targeted at addressing specific harms while allowing for advances 
in innovation. In doing so, governments should evaluate both 
regulatory and non-regulatory approaches, proceeding to regulation 
only in cases where gaps are identified. In some instances, existing 
regulatory regimes may already cover agentic AI.

Because this is an evolution of AI technology, our prior recommendations, 
including those outlined in our 2024 AI Accountability Framework, still apply. 
For example, even in the context of agentic AI, transparency along the AI value 
chain, consumer-facing transparency, and appropriately allocating roles and 
responsibilities within the AI value chain are all things that any robust public 
policy framework should seek to incorporate. These recommendations are 
not intended to be prescriptive and instead introduce areas that policymakers 
should consider in developing a framework that will appropriately support 
responsible development and adoption of agentic AI systems.
Promoting adoption
To promote broad adoption of agentic AI, policy makers should take steps to 
enable deployment across the economy, foster institutional capacity, and 
support talent development.

Develop and advance a national AI adoption strategy. Governments should 
consider developing national AI strategies that outline ways in which they 
will support the adoption and integration of AI, including agentic AI. Such 
a strategy should outline the specific steps that governments will take to 
support innovation and engender adoption. 
As a part of this, governments should endeavor to identify priority sectors 
where adoption could yield significant societal benefit, like in national 
security, cybersecurity, and fraud detection, and work to explore how to 
promote adoption in these areas. Furthermore, adoption strategies could 
also consider how adoption could support specific groups, such as upskilling 
the workforce, training small businesses and entrepreneurs to help them 
compete. 

Address practical constraints for government adoption of agentic AI. We encourage 
governments to identify what actions can be taken under existing authorities and 
where new guidance or regulation may be necessary to support government adoption 
of agentic AI. Considering the rapid pace of technological change, the public sector 
should align government contracts with commercial terms and conditions to the 
greatest extent practicable and leverage existing authorities to promote the use 
of innovative acquisition strategies. Doing so will ensure that the public sector can 
adapt to a modern acquisition environ-ment with the tools already at its disposal.
Update and improve the government’s information technology (IT) infrastructure 
to prepare government data to benefit from agentic AI. Government IT infrastructure 
has not kept pace with the speed of innovation. Governments should continue to 
focus on IT modernization efforts to adopt modern data management practices. This 
means replacing outdated and end-of-life technology, reducing data fragmentation, 
and consolidating and standardizing government-data sharing practices so that data 
is properly structured and can scale to make better use of investments in agentic AI. 
Ensure that government contract requirements promote outcomes-based 
approaches to enable greater adoption of agentic AI. Government contracts should 
refrain from specifying the type of technology or specific resources that must be 
used in performance of a contract. Instead, governments should focus on identifying 
a specific outcome that may be particularly well-suited for advanced AI tools to 
accomplish, such as improving the delivery of public benefits. AI, as a broad concept, 
is already being used in many commercial applications, tools, and processes used by 
the government. Focusing on outcomes will enable government contracting officers 
to promote greater collaboration between government and industry to identify the 
right AI tool suited for the mission, such as agentic AI.
Leverage agentic AI to modernize and make government operations and the 
delivery of services more efficient. Governments can support IT modernization 
efforts by leveraging the power of agentic AI to deliver simpler, faster, and more 
reliable services. With the ability to automate routine, and task-oriented processes 
that underpin many core government functions—such as constituent casework, 
network security operations, etc.—the government can empower the federal 
workforce to focus on delivering more efficient services and break down barriers to 
the public's access to critical government resources. 
Support voluntary testing environments, like regulatory sandboxes. Leveraging 
regulatory sandboxes allows innovators and businesses to develop and test new 
technologies in a controlled environment that is free from certain regulatory regimes 
or compliance processes. This allows for experimentation with agentic AI, promotes 
innovation, and contributes to learning on behalf of the relevant authorities. 
Policymakers should identify where sandbox activities can occur under current law, 
and where new authorities might be needed.
Support workforce readiness to enable adoption of agentic AI. As agentic AI continues 
to evolve, governments should work with industry, academia, and civil society to 
understand its impact on job functions and highlight the skills that will be most 
relevant to empower the future workforce. Investing in workforce readiness through 
public-private partnerships that focus on upskilling, reskilling, and digital literacy is 
imperative. Some of these policies may include “training sabbaticals” and learning
time carve-outs as best practice, offering grant or tax credits for firms that allocate 
protected time for AI skilling with human-oversight principles. 

Fostering trust
Trust is foundational to promoting adoption. With that in mind, policy-makers should take 
steps to engender trust when considering agentic AI.
Adopt a risk-based approach tailored to the deployment context. Agentic AI systems 
should be viewed as a spectrum: they can vary in their level of autonomy, the tools 
they use, and the environments in which they operate. Therefore, assessing risks 
requires considering the degree of autonomy, as well as the context in which an 
agentic AI system is deployed. 
For example, an agentic AI system that acts as a personal assistant and independently 
schedules personal calendar appointments may operate with the same degree of 
autonomy as one that manages a hospital's patient scheduling. However, the potential 
risks associated with an error in these two contexts differs significantly, highlighting 
the importance of taking deployment context into account in risk management.  
In seeking to appropriately manage risk, policymakers should leverage existing 
frameworks for agentic AI governance. Our AI Accountability Framework lays out 
key practices that we believe are appropriate to apply to high-risk AI systems, as well 
as to frontier AI models. We encourage policymakers to reference this document in 
considering regulatory or legislative approaches to AI. Assuming existing AI regulatory 
and policy frameworks have been crafted in a sufficiently flexible and future-proof 
way, they should also be applicable to agentic AI. Similarly, existing legal regimes that 
address concerns related to possible harms should also apply to agentic AI. Indeed, an 
entirely new and different approach is unnecessary.
However, given some agentic AI systems’ degree of autonomy, it may be appropriate to 
undertake more rigorous red-teaming and testing pre- and post-deployment of an agent 
system.
Foster transparency in the agentic AI value chain. Policymakers should recognize 
that agentic AI systems are layered, and therefore, the behavior of the agent 
system is influenced not only by the base model, but also by the environment in 
which it operates, the data it uses, its goal orientation, and its system architecture. 
Transparency should therefore be tailored to the unique characteristics  
of such systems. 
Rather than creating new disclosure regimes from scratch, policy-makers should explore 
how existing tools, like model cards and system cards, can be leveraged to communicate 
information about agent systems to downstream deployers. System cards could be 
extended to reflect agent behavior(s) and characteristics, including, at a high level, the 
ways in which the system was tested and evaluated prior to release but also potentially 
communicating information about human oversight, permissions, and the tools and system 
architecture incorporated. 
As we outline in ITI’s Transparency Policy Principles31, our seminal paper on AI transparency, 
the audience for transparency matters. The information that is important to communicate 
to a downstream actor in the AI value chain will likely differ from the type of information 
communicated to the end-user, especially in consumer-facing settings. 
For example, it may be sufficient to provide notice to a user operating an agentic  AI system 
that they are interacting with an AI agent system, describing its role, primary capabilities, 
and known limitations. At the same time, for regulatory purposes, developers and 
integrators may need to provide, upon request, more detailed information on the agent 
such as autonomy level, tool access, and escalation levels.32 This dual-level design ensures 
meaningful transparency without overwhelming users or under-informing regulators.

Recognize that responsibilities should be allocated based upon function and role 
in the agentic AI value chain. As outlined above and in all ITI’s existing AI policy 
collateral, the agentic AI value chain includes a variety of players, each with different 
responsibilities. Stakeholders throughout the value chain play a role in ensuring 
that AI is developed and deployed responsibly. In considering if and how to apply 
obligations in the context of a policy framework or other-wise, policymakers should 
seek to apply said obligations proportionally, considering what each stakeholder 
in the agentic AI value chain has control over. Understanding this allocation of 
responsibilities will prevent duplication and ensure that each actor is responsible for 
what they can meaningfully influence.
For example, with transparency, the model developer will have insight into the base 
model’s limitations and capabilities and should communicate that information to other 
downstream actors. The agentic AI system integrator, however, will have insight into the 
system’s planning logic, level of autonomy, and its tool use. 
Finally, the deployer of an agentic AI system will have ultimate responsibility for usage 
policy, knowledge of the environment in which the system is deployed in, the data it has 
access to, and the human oversight mechanisms that have been put in place. 
It is important to recognize that these roles and responsibilities are not necessarily mutually 
exclusive. In some instances, a model developer and agentic AI system integrator could be 
one and the same. In other cases, the system integrator and the deployer could be the same. 
At the same time, it is important to keep in mind that agentic AI systems’ behavior often 
emerges from complex interactions between components in ways that can make clean 
responsibility allocation challenging. Unlike traditional supply chains, systems of agents 
can exhibit emergent behaviors from the interplay of models, prompts, and tools. That said, 
while we believe allocation of responsibility in a proportionate way remains imperative, it 
may be more challenging in certain instances given the way agentic AI systems interact. 

Adopt a comprehensive federal privacy law. Implementing privacy legislation 
provides a unified, national framework for responsible business practices. It 
strengthens and simplifies data management practices across the economy and 
provides a firm foundation for advancing trustworthy AI.
Enhance the security of agentic AI. Security measures may include ensuring risk
based and actionable human control and oversight, implementing limitations 
on agentic AI capabilities (e.g. purpose-specific entitlements on capabilities and 
resource access), and making agentic AI actions and planning observable and 
verifiable. Further efforts may also include the use and development of best 
practices and promotion of commercially available solutions that help mitigate risk. 
It may also be worth considering how to incentivize the adoption of frameworks 
developed for agentic AI, especially as there are many security frameworks 
emerging across the globe, which will be developed, consolidated and refined 
over time. We encourage policymakers to leverage guidance and/or encourage the 
adoption of guidance produced by global organizations. For example, the Coalition 
for Secure AI published Principles for Secure by Design Agentic Systems to provide 
practical implementation strategies that security teams can deploy.33  
Promote the adoption of voluntary best practices to govern risks related to 
agentic AI. Policymakers should support the adoption of existing standards, 
frameworks, and best practices for AI risk management, like NIST’s AI Risk 
Management Framework and the ISO/IEC 42001 series. Many of these frameworks 
remain relevant in an agentic AI context because they are technology-neutral 
and govern processes. That said, it is also worth considering if and how existing 
frameworks can evolve to allow organizations to better operationalize suggested 
practices. 
For example, developing a risk-tiering structure for agentic systems could be 
helpful in ensuring consistency of risk assessment across stakeholder groups. 
This could potentially be undertaken in the form of an Agentic AI Profile in the 
context of the AI RMF. Because agentic AI is an evolving area, best practices will 
simultaneously evolve as research continues and understanding matures. 
Explore the use of privacy-enhancing technologies (PETs) and data governance and 
provenance standards. PETs, such as differential privacy, data minimization, and secure 
computation, can help protect user data during storage, processing, and transmission. 
In parallel, promoting the development of clear industry-led data governance and 
provenance standards can help ensure that agentic AI systems handle personal 
information in ways that respect individual rights and comply with applicable laws.

Promote industry-backed, open standards and protocols for agentic AI systems. 
As agentic AI systems become integral to enterprise workflows, they require 
robust mechanisms to discover, authenticate, and interact with external systems 
and other agents. Open, industry-led standards and protocols provide the 
foundational layer for this interoperability—much like TCP/IP did for the internet—
while ensuring that downstream companies can effectively deploy and integrate 
agentic systems. These open standards foster both cross-industry collaboration 
and healthy competition among AI providers, accelerating innovation while 
maintaining compatibility. Industry-led open protocols such as MCP, A2A, and 
ACP have already demonstrated their value in powering enterprise-level agentic 
workflows. Government endorsement and promotion of these open standards 
would encourage broader adoption, drive further development, and help establish 
the interoperability framework necessary  
for a thriving agentic AI ecosystem.
Promote multistakeholder collaboration on evaluating emerging risks. Given the 
evolving nature of agentic AI systems, policymakers should encourage continued 
collaborative research to both understand and evaluate emerging risks and ensure 
consistency in how these risks are measured and assessed.
Leveraging existing multilateral forums, such as the OECD or G7, can enhance 
multistakeholder collaboration on emerging risks and opportunities related to agentic AI. 
Previous initiatives, like the Hiroshima AI Process, have produced valuable outcomes, and 
similar discussions could facilitate the adoption of agentic AI while effectively managing 
associated risks.
Supporting the development of shared security evaluation frameworks, responsible 
vulnerability disclosure mechanisms, and interoperable standards alongside 
international partners. Such cooperation can help build collective resilience and promote 
the safe and ethical deployment of agentic AI systems globally.
Additionally, evaluating agentic AI systems will require the development of new or the 
adaptation of existing metrics. Those used to evaluate traditional machine learning 
may need to evolve to appropriately assess an agentic AI system’s performance. 
Considerations should include whether the agent meets the original user request, selects 
the most appropriate tools, and understandss the initial goals. Government, industry, and 
academia should collaborate to develop these standards and develop collaborative 
evaluation frameworks for agentic AI systems.
Finally, ongoing research into an agentic AI system’s ability to independently pursue 
goals and persistently make decisions, including methods for voluntarily documenting 
agent behavior, could be a helpful area of research to support.



